# Blockchain Basics

Originally, blockchain was just the computer science term for how to structure and share data. Today, blockchains are hailed the "fifth evolution ⚛" of computing. Blockchains are a novel approach to the distributed database. The innovation comes from incorporating old technology in new ways. You can think of blockchains as distributed databases that a group of individuals controls and that store and share information.

There are many different types of blockchains and blockchain applications. Blockchain is an all-encompassing technology that is integrating across platforms and hardware all over the world.

A blockchain is a data structure that makes it possible to create a digital ledger of data and share it among a network of independent parties. There are many different types of blockchains.

- Public blockchains: Public blockchains, such as Bitcoin, are large distributed networks that are run through a native token. They're open for anyone to participate at any level and have open-source code that their community maintains.
- Permissioned blockchains: Permissioned blockchains, such as Ripple, control roles that individuals can play within the network. They're still large and distributed systems that use a native token. Their core code may or may not be open source.
- Private blockchains: Private blockchains tend to be smaller and do not utilize a token. Their membership is closely controlled. These types of blockchains are favored by consortiums that have trusted members and trade confidential information.

> from [How Blockchains Work by <sub>- dummies.com</sub>](dummies.com/article/business-careers-money/personal-finance/cryptocurrency/what-is-blockchain-and-what-blockchains-are-242782/)

## so whats Web3 then ?? 🤨

### well here is a gist history of web

In the early 2000s, the internet started with basic, static web pages known as Web 1.0. As social media and online businesses emerged, the internet evolved into Web 2.0, featuring interactive pages and user-generated content. However, Web 2.0 raised concerns about data control and privacy due to being centralized .

This is where Web 3.0, or Web3, comes in.
Web3 aims to decentralize the internet, shifting from centralized platforms to trust-free protocols. It envisions a web where users have control over their data and
identity, eliminating the need for intermediaries. The goal is to build a decentralized
and trustless infrastructure for a more secure and user-centric online experience.

#### Now thats out of the way then how do it work

well that changes for every other blockchain but main concept is that the blockchain has a number of different nodes or computing units that **you can also think of a blockchain like a decentralized database that is immutable.**

A blockchain can be broken down fundamentally into several components e.g Node, Transaction, Block, Chain and The consensus protocol (proof of work, proof of stake, proof of history).
